---
title: "Reflecting on the first year of an economics PhD program"
date: 2020-05-28
url: /posts/0002
tags: ["academia","economics","personal"]
summary: "I’ve been in academia now for around five years and I have yet to run into a grad student who I felt wasn’t working hard enough: effort is never why students fail. The admissions process is random and biased and flawed, but it reliably overselects on work ethic. I worry that telling prospective or current students that they will fail if they aren’t ready to commit all their waking hours to a subject they’re really only just sinking their teeth into will be self-fulfilling with deterrent effects on people with underrepresented or non-traditional backgrounds and less entrenched in the self-preserving microculture of academia."
showToc: true
disableAnchoredHeadings: false
---

Many people find the first year of the PhD excruciating ([economics in
particular](https://twitter.com/gotonura/status/1199717969229729793)),
especially those in programs like mine that may cut a number of their
students based on their coursework performance. This leads people to
offer advice along the lines of what I quoted below:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Counterpoint: nah. <a href="https://t.co/Qp9TK5o6za"\>https://t.co/Qp9TK5o6za\</a></p>— infinite wiggles (@alampaydavis) <a href="https://twitter.com/alampaydavis/status/1199072950214897665?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw"\>November 25, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I'd suggest reading the full thread and the replies to get a sense of
how prevalent these feelings are. In retrospect, Prof. Cunningham's
well-intentioned advice didn't deserve my flippancy and I also don't
mean to disregard the experiences of others who've struggled. To that
end, I should state upfront that I've been known to be "unnaturally
chill" even when objectively struggling, to paraphrase a friend from
grad school. This is often beneficial and I think it comes from being
very in touch with my personal values, things far more difficult and
important than grad school giving me perspective, and a view that
alarmist advice like this is counterproductive at best and toxic at
worst.

First, I've been in academia now for over five years and I have yet to
run into a grad student who I felt wasn't working hard enough: effort is
never why students fail. The admissions process is random and biased and
flawed, but it reliably overselects on work ethic. I worry that telling
prospective or current students that they will fail if they aren't ready
to commit all their waking hours to a subject they're really only just
sinking their teeth into will be self-fulfilling with deterrent effects
on people with underrepresented or non-traditional backgrounds and less
entrenched in the self-preserving microculture of academia.

Second, if you have outside options, appreciate them and if they lead
you to assess your priorities, let them. Ironically, a lot of first year
material is dedicated to the adverse consequences of informational
asymmetry so it's funny for economists to willfully restrict their
information set.

To turn Dr. Cunningham's advice further down the thread against itself,
"living in reality is rule one." Academics are prone to career tunnel
vision and judgment of those who don't have the same academic
aspirations so as PhD students inevitably absorb an academic myopia
through osmosis, their definition of success needlessly narrows. It
happens subtly, but it can be powerful and when not considered
mindfully, toxic. Being in tune with your personal values is part of
countering this. The academics I least respect are very bad at this.

Combine this with well-documented proliferation of stress-related mental
health problems of grad students and an unforgiving market for
professorships and you're needlessly setting yourself up for a greater
and largely manufactured fall later on, if not in the first-year cuts,
then later on the job market or on the tenure track. Having experienced
many successes but also much more failure than the typical student in my
position, I see some of my lifelong high-achieving peers' inability to
consider or relate to doing anything less than excelling at the task or
objective put in front of them as a weakness.

Third, for those with less research experience, it is ridiculous to
expect to feel so passionate about the field that you cannot imagine
doing anything else. First-year economics material in particular is
dense and theoretical and surely removed from the stuff that drew people
to pursue a PhD. A lot of it is fascinating, but it's undoubtedly the
vegetables of the PhD training process. Feeling less than totally
committed to spending six years of your 20s to 30s at below-market wages
when your only exposure to academia is being examined on upper
hemicontinuity is---it cannot be said enough---extremely sane.
First-year course material is unlikely to directly inspire your eventual
research agenda; it's healthy to maintain a longer-term perspective and
remind yourself that what you do in first year isn't the job.

Fourth, conditional on passing, your coursework grades don't matter. I
find this is difficult for some of my peers to internalize, but it
really doesn't (except [in
Chicago](https://twitter.com/FairweatherPhD/status/1290770070675664896)
apparently). Sure, some professors will have a better impression of the
top performers, but that's a pretty tenuous and intangible reward for
overexertion and will be forgotten and replaced by progress on your
research anyway. The relationship between the two is weak; I have
first-hand experience with this and know of full professors arguing this
point internally to reduce the mental burden on first-year students.

Finally, it leads one to view their cohortmates---who should be sources
of support and future collaboration---as potential adversaries. This was
reportedly the case in some programs that waived the preliminary exam
requirement conditional on meeting thresholds for coursework
performance. This should probably be familiar advice, but its triteness
doesn't make it untrue: I would not have made it through first year
without the collaboration of my cohortmates.

I can have a competitive streak at times, but I also spent first year
purposefully trying to reject the incentives to view cohortmates as
competitors. For example, whenever possible, I tried to share my
typewritten notes with my classmates ahead of midterm and final exams.
Spending entire days producing them, there was of course a part of me
that felt people were freeloading off my work. But refer to points 1 and
4: no grad student isn't working hard enough and the odds that the
usefulness and quality of my notes would come back to haunt me so
directly that it proximately caused my failing the program are
negligible. I think getting over the trepidation to help others at
personal cost is healthy in any context even if not strictly Pareto.
What made it really easy was my classmates doing it first and
reciprocating. Culture is endogenous.
