---
title: "On not getting into a PhD program"
date: 2021-03-02
url: /posts/0003
tags: ["academia","personal","economics"]
summary: "This profession has a way of subtly placing blinders on the impressionable young people it attracts or keeping them too occupied or insulated to expand their horizons. I think people get hung up on the idea of 'I just need to clear this obstacle and then the rest of my life can begin', but academia is just a series of checkpoints exactly like that. Each one should give us pause when we come to them."
author: "Matthew Alampay Davis"
showToc: true
disableAnchoredHeadings: false
---

Based on the occasional email I get seeking advice, many people
considering a social science PhD end up on my website at some point in
that process. As probably the most competitive round of admissions
decisions ever comes to a close, thought I'd reflect on my experience
not getting into any doctoral programs the first time I applied.

Clearly, my second bid panned out and I'm fortunate to have ended up in
my favorite city doing what I wanted to do. But re-applying two years
after first getting rejected cost more than I anticipated in energy,
resources, and especially time just for another deeply imperfect
crapshoot. I'm still skeptical it was wise to spend two years of the
prime of my life in this sort of limbo in addition to the two years
prior when I worked as a pre-doctoral research assistant. I say this
even having had the security of a fully funded master's degree to keep
me afloat over that period.

If you're considering re-application, you should have a plan to
demonstrably augment your application by the time your re-application is
assessed even if you believe your blanking the first time was just a bad
draw (more likely this year than ever). In my case, my gamble certainly
would not have paid off had research I co-authored not been published by
the time I sent out my second round of applications while I was
concurrently doing my M.Phil. This was a best-case scenario. I also
spent my savings from my two years of work enrolling in summer courses
to bolster my transcript, which I now feel was a dumb decision made
blindly that ultimately didn't really move the needle despite what it
cost me.

If you're reading this as someone who's been rejected from a PhD
program, please try to fully appreciate your options without career
tunnel vision. There's no way of spinning the reality that getting
uniformly rejected sucks but I don't think it's trite to call this an
opportunity. This profession has a way of subtly placing these blinders
on the impressionable young people it attracts or keeping them too
occupied or insulated to expand their horizons. I think people get hung
up on the idea of 'I just need to clear this obstacle and then the rest
of my life can begin', but academia is just a series of checkpoints
exactly like that. Each one should give us pause when we come to them.
Whatever you choose to pour into this career path going forward, it's
important to be cognizant that institutional academia will never
reciprocate that devotion. I'm writing this for my own benefit too.
