---
title: "Links, lately"
date: 2019-01-26
url: /posts/0011
tags: ["social media","business","technology","politics","philippines","academia","movies","science","television","podcasts"]
summary: "What I've been reading, featuring my vote in the 2016 Philippine election and the mediocrity of 'Vice'"
author: "Matthew Alampay Davis"
showToc: true
disableAnchoredHeadings: false
---

### [Facebook's libertarian business model, a threat to democratic movements everywhere](https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2019/01/17/facebook-apologize-later/)

> *By now it should be obvious that Facebook's so-called pro-democracy
> rhetoric has been fundamentally damaging to real democracies and to
> democratic movements around the world. It has also directly benefited
> authoritarian regimes, which have relied on the platform to spread
> untruths in order to control and manipulate their citizens. In the
> Philippines, as content moderators busily remove posts and pictures
> according to a bespoke metric developed by "mostly
> twenty-something-year-olds" in Menlo Park, California, the president,
> Rodrigo Duterte, is busy on Facebook too, using paid followers to
> spread falsehoods about his critics and his policies. The journalist
> Maria Ressa, whose news organization, Rappler, has been keeping a
> database of the more than twelve million Facebook accounts that have
> attacked critics of Duterte and have been traced back to the
> president, has been a target of those accounts as well, at one point
> getting as manmy as ninety hate messages an hour via
> Facebook---messages like 'I want Maria Ressa to be raped repeatedly to
> death.*

> *In countries like the Philippines and Myanmar, where the vast
> majority of people access the Internet through Facebook, not using the
> platform is likely not an option. Indeed, establishing an equivalence
> between Facebook and the Internet is one of the payoffs of Free
> Basics, an app Facebook created that provides purposefully limited
> Internet access---there is no stand-alone e-mail server and Facebook
> is the only social media platform---to people in developing countries
> who wouldn't otherwise be able to afford to go online.*

There was a special futility in my mailing my overseas ballot against
Duterte in 2016 when I lived three minutes from Facebook\'s [East Palo
Alto](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/East_Palo_Alto,_California)--gentrifying
campus. Like even though I could well have been the only voter in the
Philippine elections living in this historically disenfranchised
American city still suffering from its legacy of redlining, racial
segregation, crime, violence, and public neglect, the net contribution
of my small neighborhood to my home country 7000 miles away was nothing
less than the corrosion of its democracy.

### [Sophie Smith on 'academic freedom'](https://www.lrb.co.uk/blog/2019/01/14/sophie-smith/academic-freedom/) (h/t Junho)

> *Hatred might not come into it for Finnis, but there is little doubt
> that hating, disliking, maligning gay people -- and creating the
> conditions under which gay people come to loathe themselves -- follow
> from his proposals*

> *When I read my straight colleagues telling everyone else to give
> Finnis the \'respect\' of engaging with his opinions, to \'make
> arguments\' in response, I wonder how many times they have had to
> \'make the argument\' for their happiness, for their home and their
> partner, for the life they\'ve built with the people they love. At
> times, I\'m not even sure what I am meant to be making the argument
> for. It does not matter if my gayness was innate or chosen, it is so
> deeply a part of me, such a root cause of any fulfilment that I feel
> and any good that I do, that it becomes clear that what really follows
> from Finnis\'s view is that I should stop existing as me. I should
> retreat into some other Sophie, who lives without the woman who makes
> her a better teacher, listener, thinker. Finnis thinks my good would
> be actualised in an unhappy marriage with a man. But almost everything
> I know about the virtues, I learned from my experiences as a gay
> woman: courage, constancy, generosity, love. I can engage, certainly,
> I can make arguments in response, but there is also a sense, at a
> deeper level, in which there is nothing I can say.*

### Vice (2018), dir. Adam McKay

-   Didn't really like it

-   As with McKay\'s *The Big Short*, the movie is defined by its
    narration, dark comedy, and hyper-stylized editing. I\'m all for
    that and bought in the instant the trailer was released. It just
    wasn\'t done nearly as well in the final product. Definitely some
    highlights, but if you take on Cheney and the neoconservative world
    order on this large a platform, you have a responsibility to do so
    thoughtfully. That\'s not a criticism of the stylization or comedic
    take of the film; I just mean that if you\'re going to take on this
    subject and license the recency, pain, and footage of real events,
    you should submit a product that demonstrates more effort went into
    its formulation. Everything about this felt unfinished.

-   For one thing, the two-hour movie couldn't decide whether it was
    going to be a biopic or an exploration of the cruelty of the
    Bush-Cheney Iraq War. The first half runs through Cheney\'s life,
    but he\'s already a diabolical opportunist from the outset: early
    scenes include him unbothered by a colleague\'s shattered leg and
    only choosing to identify as a Republican for its career advantages.
    This isn\'t a character study then; he's the same person the entire
    movie, there is no development which makes it hard to make a
    compelling narrative biopic.

-   Given the above, if the second half of the movie is supposed to be
    about the cruelty of the Bush-Cheney administration during the Iraq
    War, why did we spend the entire first half on a mostly-irrelevant
    overview of Cheney\'s career path? The movie\'s [\"Where Are They
    Now?\"
    epilogue](https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/WhereAreTheyNowEpilogue)
    suggests McKay\'s movie is \'about\' the cost of the unnecessary
    Iraq War; if that\'s the takeaway of the movie, then humanizing
    Cheney and spending time on anything more than the broad strokes of
    his non-political life story shouldn\'t occupy nearly as much time
    as it did.

-   Also it used its ending monologue to accuse the audience of
    complicity in Cheney\'s empowerment. That would be OK if there were
    any lead-up to it, but the movie showed he was unelectable whenever
    he ran at the front of a ticket and entered the private sector
    because of it. Cheney\'s power came from unprecedented diminution of
    a president behind the scenes and away from public scrutiny. How
    then is Cheney\'s foreign policy the public\'s fault? Just felt
    completely out of left field for that to be presented as the message
    of the movie.

-   The narration is awful. It\'s somehow indignantly sanctimonious and
    condescending while also not explaining enough what was wrong. It
    spent a lot of time re-emphasizing the same point about the Unitary
    Executive Theory---not that complicated a concept from what I can
    tell---while glossing over the exact details of how it was
    exploited. We had a very cool montage of Cheney installing his men
    in different sections of government, but we never actually see how
    he used the machine he built to create the war he wanted other than
    when they mention he had a lot of offices. Yes, we see that
    Halliburton influenced his Iraq policy---very subtle: on election
    night, Cheney reads his wife a text saying they got \"double what we
    expected\" as their exit bonus---but other than a map of oil wells
    and a spreadsheet of energy companies, we don\'t know what the
    administration actually did for them in Iraq. At one point, Rumsfeld
    asks Cheney whether they\'d be indicted and the audience doesn\'t
    even really know what those hypothetical charges would be.

-   Sam Rockwell in the wake of last year\'s Oscar win turns in a bad
    SNL impression as George W. Bush. Similarly lazy: at some point
    McKay asked himself how to convey Steve Carrell\'s Donald
    Rumsfeld\'s evil and decided the answer was to have someone ask him
    what his values are and have him laugh and shut the door on them.
    Come on now, how are you going to spend all that runtime on
    Cheney\'s pre-political years but not spend time on Rumsfeld\'s
    brand of evil?

-   \"Vice\" as in \'*vice* president\' and \"Vice\" as in \'bad\'
    because the vice president was bad

-   Rare instance where [the Reddit comments are generally on
    point](https://www.reddit.com/r/movies/comments/a9gjba/official_discussion_vice_spoilers/?sort=top)

-   All in all, my frustration stems from seeing an argument I
    sympathize with being made poorly and without focus or sense of
    story-telling. The movie is a correct opinion argued poorly, which
    can be more devastating to an argument than a good counterargument.

-   If you wanted a ridiculously over-the-top challenge to the moral
    corruption of the crony capitalist elite, the WWE did it better:

\<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"\>\<p lang="en" dir="ltr"\>Non
wrestling fans who are wondering what\'s up with wrestling, check this
shit out \<a
href="[https://t.co/lxmWIQxl2S"](https://t.co/lxmWIQxl2S")pic.twitter.com/lxmWIQxl2S\</a\>\</p\>&mdash;
Orin (\@orinanne) \<a
href="[https://twitter.com/orinanne/status/1087898915540746240?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw"](https://twitter.com/orinanne/status/1087898915540746240?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw")January
23, 2019\</a\>\</blockquote\> \<script async
src="[https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"](https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js")
charset="utf-8"\>\</script\>

### [AFAIK, the first mainstream challenge to Kamala Harris\' prosecution record of this Democratic primary seasond](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/17/opinion/kamala-harris-criminal-justice.html?fbclid=IwAR2Uu5dY67tDeL1MBBlIccHkPGmLrIcbpwEY6k2s5-RGPG2doyNSDSys-l0&smid=fb-nytopinion&smtyp=cur#commentsContainer)

### [The conservative obsession with Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2019/01/why-conservatives-cant-stop-talking-about-alexandria-ocasio-cortez/579901/)

> *When people of color enter elite spaces, they make those with
> unearned advantages conscious of how they\'ve been favored by the
> system. That poses a choice to those whose access to such cloistered
> communities is unquestioned: They can recognize that others might also
> succeed given the right circumstances, or they can defend the
> inequities of that system in an effort to preserve their self-image,
> attacking the new entrant as a charlatan or the group they belong to
> as backwards.*

### [Spotify's new revenue-sharing system is dumb](https://www.theringer.com/tech/2019/1/16/18184314/spotify-music-streaming-service-royalty-payout-model)

### *Pnin, Vladimir Nabokov*

No relevant link here but the third selection in our college book club.
Also my first time reading Nabokov, which I learned I've been
pronouncing wrong (but still better than
[Sting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KNIZofPB8ZM&t=138s)).

### [Have aliens found us?](https://www.newyorker.com/news/the-new-yorker-interview/have-aliens-found-us-a-harvard-astronomer-on-the-mysterious-interstellar-object-oumuamua?utm_social-type=owned&utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=social&mbid=social_facebook&utm_brand=tny&fbclid=IwAR10mruKF9YZKT6Q32wN1dwJtjcxU79SnH-LU2Mq4loOCsrNn6qB9JudMVk)

The interview is a mess but even more enjoyable when you imagine Dr. Avi
Loeb as the scientist in a B movie whose calculations correctly predict
an incoming alien invasion but everyone ignores him because his hair is
messy and he keeps clumsily dropping papers of printed-out spreadsheets
and then a high-ranking bureaucrat who\'s in cahoots with the aliens
sneeringly tells him that they\'re cutting his funding and confiscating
his desktop computer.

### [Conan O\'Brien contemplating his legacy](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/14/arts/television/conan-obrien-tbs-show-reboot-half-hour.html) (h/t Junho)

The context is his late-night show was restructured from an hour to a
30-minute format

> *Calvin Coolidge was a pretty popular president. I\'ve been to his
> grave in Vermont. It has the presidential seal on it. Nobody was
> there.*

> *I had a great conversation with Albert Brooks once. When I met him
> for the first time, I was kind of stammering. I said, you make movies,
> they live on forever. I just do these late-night shows, they get lost,
> they\'re never seen again and who cares? And he looked at me and he
> said, [Albert Brooks voice] \"What are you talking about? None of it
> matters.\" None of it matters? \"No, that\'s the secret. In 1940,
> people said Clark Gable is the face of the 20th Century. Who
> [expletive] thinks about Clark Gable? It doesn\'t matter. You\'ll be
> forgotten. I\'ll be forgotten. We\'ll all be forgotten.\" It\'s so
> funny because you\'d think that would depress me. I was walking on air
> after that.*

Relevant: his recent appearance on the *Comedy Bang Bang* podcast. The
style of the podcast is often absurdist, fast pace, and highly
improvisational. Associating Conan with the late-night monologuing
format that I\'ve long found trite, I was really impressed by his
ability not just to keep up with host Scott Aukerman. It\'s a strange
duality that I frequently confront with Conan, Late Show-era Stephen
Colbert, and the best SNL alumni: their undeniable innate talent and
intelligence contrasted against the mediocrity of their TV shows.

### [Two-time Oscar-nominated actor-director Jonah Hill in conversation with Tony-nominated Broadway star Michael Cera](https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/a24/episodes/Dont-Be-A-Stranger-with-Jonah-Hill–Michael-Cera-e2t6ea/a-a8iulc)

\<iframe
src="[https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/a24/embed/episodes/Dont-Be-A-Stranger-with-Jonah-Hill--Michael-Cera-e2t6ea/a-a8iulc"](https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/a24/embed/episodes/Dont-Be-A-Stranger-with-Jonah-Hill–Michael-Cera-e2t6ea/a-a8iulc")
height="102px" width="400px" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"\>\</iframe\>

Apparently they know each other from a movie they were in as teenagers
