---
title: "Links, lately"
date: 2019-01-27
url: /reads/0013
tags: ["movies","mexico","race","journalism","media","climate","immigration","literature","science fiction"]
summary: "What I've been reading, featuring how we write about other cultures, how we write about racism, how we write about climate change, and how we write about the Animorphs"
author: "Matthew Alampay Davis"
showToc: true
disableAnchoredHeadings: false
---

### [The review of *Roma* I've been waiting for](https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2019/02/07/alfonso-cuaron-roma-twisting-nature-love/)

Written by Alma Guillermoprieto. I posted previously about how
unsatisfactory I found the critical reception to my favorite movie of
last year, even as they're mostly positive. This review stands apart and
is a prime example of why diversity matters. It's not enough to make
note of the hierarchy or power dynamics of the society depicted. A movie
this compassionate calls for more:

> *Cuarón is not interested in portraying Cleo anthropologically: he
> wants to show us what she was to him, and to tell the story of Mexico
> City and what happened to Cleo the year that his own family
> shattered.*

With the attention bestowed upon it by a Best Picture nomination, this
film is too rare, important, and (above all) good to not be talked about
with the specificity and insight Guillermoprieto provides.

> *I once interviewed a couple of dozen domestic servants about their
> work. It was hard to get young* empleadas *to talk to me, particularly
> if they were from the countryside... But the older women had plenty to
> say. A surprising number stated that they were happy with their
> families...*
>
> *But what I heard most frequently was the rage they felt at previous
> employers who had fired them with no warning or thought for their
> feelings. What about the children? they would ask. They fire us, we
> have to abandon them, and then you have to learn to love a new set of
> children, and you're always afraid you're going to be fired all over
> again and lose them. One woman cried as she explained this. "They
> never think about the fact that we love the children," she said.*
>
> *That the women I interviewed could love the children they cared
> for---and love them, in fact, to the point of heartbreak---was to me
> nothing short of miraculous."*

### [Journalists avoiding calling racist things racist](http://bostonreview.net/race/lawrence-glickman-racially-tinged)

Same topic also covered by [the
*AP*](http://www.niemanlab.org/2018/12/say-it-with-me-racism/)(headline:
"Say it with me: Racism") and [the
*Atlantic*](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2018/06/just-say-its-racist/561962/)(headline:
"Just Say It's Racist").

> *A 1956 profile of Georgia senator Herman Talmadge called him "an
> advocate of 'White Supremacy'" and noted that "he makes no bones about
> this." Talmadge and his southern white colleagues did not shy away
> from racist language. For example, at the 1948 breakaway States'
> Rights Democrats (aka Dixiecrats) convention, South Carolina's Strom
> Thurmond claimed, "There's not enough troops in the army, to force the
> southern people to break down segregation and admit the nigger race
> into our theaters, into our swimming pools, into our homes, and into
> our churches." There was nothing "racially tinged" about Thurmond's
> comments. He saw no need to hide his racism, and journalists,
> accordingly, saw no need to describe it in euphemistic terms. When
> Thurmond filibustered the 1957 Civil Rights Act, an article about it
> in the* San Rafael Independent Journal *was surrounded by pieces with
> the headlines "Racists Hit Rights Bill as 'Vicious'" and "Racists
> Rally in Nashville." These straightforward descriptions may shock
> modern readers accustomed to the imprecise language of "racial
> provocateurs" and "nakedly racial" actions.*

```
### [Journalists offer predictions for journalism in 2019](http://www.niemanlab.org/collection/predictions-2019/)

### [Writing with climate change as a given](https://www.lrb.co.uk/v41/n03/mckenzie-funk/smoked-out)

> *There were four books in the box. They are very different from one
> another, but as a whole they represent a generational break with the
> climate change books before them. This is because not one of them is
> strictly about the topic at hand. Not one of them bothers to argue
> that climate change is real. Not one bothers to explain how societies
> can work to cut greenhouse gas emissions. Not one gets hung up on
> atmospheric science or computer models or the Paris Agreement.
> Instead, they simply take for granted that temperatures will rise and
> that the world as we know it will soon be fundamentally altered. The
> migration scholar writes about migration and the seed scientist about
> seeds and the ecosocialist about urban capitalism, but climate change
> -- the biggest, most pervasive ongoing event in the world -- is always
> present in the background. This is by necessity. Climate change is and
> will be everywhere. It doesn't stand apart from our daily existence,
> not any more.*

Two of the cities I\'ve lived in the longest come up in *Extreme Cities*
by Ashley Dawson:

> *Dawson\'s book is about the way responses to climate change are being
> shaped by the entrenched interests of capital. He takes aim at the
> comfortable notions of \'resilience\' and \'green growth\' pushed by
> -- among others -- the former mayor of New York Michael Bloomberg and
> his cast of visiting Dutch architects, questioning post-Hurricane
> Sandy projects like the Big U seawall proposed for lower Manhattan: it
> would attract tourists and protect Wall Street, but displace storm
> surge waters to surrounding, poorer neighbourhoods. \'Under present
> social conditions,\' he writes, such schemes are \'likely to be
> employed by elites to create architectures of apartheid and
> exclusionary zones of refuge\'. For Dawson, New York is the \'extreme
> city\' problem in microcosm.*
>
> *...The \$40 billion, Dutch-built Great Garuda seawall in Jakarta,
> soon to be the biggest in the world, will displace thousands of
> shack-dwellers on an existing seawall and put tens of thousands of
> fishermen out of work -- but it will give developers a chance to
> profit from selling luxury homes on artificial islands. The Eko
> Atlantic development on a peninsula off the coast of Lagos is
> patrolled by heavily armed guards and surrounded by shanty towns built
> on stilts where the chefs and nannies live. \'Both Eko Atlantic and
> the Great Garuda,\' Dawson writes, with excusably escalating rhetoric,
> \'offer visions of the extreme social injustice of emerging neoliberal
> urban phantasmagoria in a time of climate change.\'*

My home country in Todd Miller\'s migration-oriented *Storming the
Wall*:

> *One important revelation in Miller\'s book is that climate change
> science is wholly uncontroversial inside the military and security
> establishment, even high up in the Trump administration. It\'s widely
> accepted that the warming world will soon see many more refugees -- 50
> million, 250 million, a billion, nobody can say for sure -- even if
> climate migrants can\'t formally be called refugees under present
> international law... He shares Dawson\'s concern that we\'re hurtling
> ever more rapidly towards a world of haves and have-nots. \'More
> dangerous than climate disruption was the climate migrant. More
> dangerous than the drought were the people who can\'t farm because of
> the drought. More dangerous than the hurricane were the people
> displaced by the storm.\'*
>
> *Miller tells the story of Yeb and A.G. Saño, two Filipino brothers
> whose hometown was largely destroyed by 2013\'s Super Typhoon Haiyan
> and whose home region was arguably destroyed by the police state that
> rose in the typhoon\'s wake. The brothers marched a thousand miles on
> foot across the Alps to arrive in Paris for the start of the 2015 UN
> Climate Summit, with Miller joining them for the last few kilometres.
> But the climate talks took place just weeks after Islamic State\'s
> attack on the Bataclan concert hall, and Paris was in a state of
> emergency when the marchers entered the city. The brothers -- foreign,
> brown, idealistic -- put their arms around each other outside a café
> for a photo op, and a man came out and yelled at them, thrusting a
> newspaper with an image commemorating Bataclan in their faces.
> \'People here in France are not concerned about climate change,\' he
> told them. \'The people of France are concerned about terrorism.\' The
> next day, Miller walked alongside protesters demanding carbon cuts,
> running when they were attacked by riot police. It\'s a blunt but
> effective metaphor. \'As I ran,\' he writes, \'I realised I had
> arrived at the true climate summit.\'*

### [*New Yorker* profile of Marlon James](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/01/28/why-marlon-james-decided-to-write-an-african-game-of-thrones)

His third novel won the 2015 Man Booker Prize, the first for a Jamaican
writer. He describes his upcoming novel as the first part of a planned
\"African *Game of Thrones*\" trilogy:

> *Several years ago, after a frustrating argument with a friend about
> the all-white cast of "The Hobbit," James had an impulse "to reclaim
> all the stuff I like---court intrigue, monsters, magic," he told me.
> "I wanted black pageantry. I wanted just one novel where someone like
> me is in it, and I don't have to look like I just walked out of HP
> Lovecraft, with a bone in my hair, and my lips are bigger than my
> eyes, and I'm saying some shit like 'Oonga boonga boonga.' Or else I'm
> some fucker named Gagool and I'm thwarting you as you get the
> diamonds."*
>
> *...When it comes to feedback on his own work, James is headstrong and
> malleable by turns. But, if someone offers an astute correction, he
> never forgets it. For most of his career, he's been working off a note
> that the Trinidadian novelist Elizabeth Nunez gave him in 2002. "She
> told me that I was talented, but that I didn't know how to write
> women," he said. "I didn't know how women related to each other, how
> they processed the unthinkable." He reread Iris Murdoch, Alice Walker,
> and Muriel Spark, and concluded that Nunez was right.*
>
> *As if accepting a challenge, he set his second novel entirely in the
> world of the feminine unthinkable... "I really tried to get my Jane
> Austen on!" he said.*

There\'s also a great discussion in there invoking Chinua Achebe, VS
Naipaul, and Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie on the topic of non-Western
writers Westernizing their work out of shame. I can relate to that: when
I\'d write short stories as a kid growing up in Indonesia, the addresses
in my stories would be named \"Main Street\" and would feature
characters named \"Mark Johnson\" or similar. (You internalize these
feelings when neither the works in your syllabi nor the adults with the
authority to teach them are from the continent you live in.)

### [*The Paris Review* revisits the Animorphs series](https://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2019/01/23/what-was-it-about-animorphs/?fbclid=IwAR0WeoTrmYdS7fuwV_0GzOMZczl2KsryI-Zjb3vGbuFiY5ETckZMngRxKxs)

> *The series ran from 1996 to 2001 and consisted of fifty-four books
> plus spin-offs, all credited to \"K.A. Applegate\" (in reality, they
> were written by the husband-and-wife team Katherine Applegate and
> Michael Grant, with ghostwriters taking over after Book 25)*

Sad to learn that all these years later. Still, I felt like the writer
is overapologizing for liking these books. It was a legitimately fun
series with an iconic gimmick! Plus this series and [*Tomorrow, When The
War Began*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tomorrow,_When_the_War_Began)
were the first Western books I\'d come across that had non-white
characters regarded romantically. That was a mild revelation for me at
that age though it seems I\'m not the only one who read a lot into those
books:

> *Consequently, today\'s Animorphs apologias share a tendency to assert
> that the series wasn\'t really about five teenagers morphing into
> animals to fight aliens---that it was really about something else,
> though there\'s no consensus on precisely what. [Matt Crowley of the
> AV
> Club](https://www.avclub.com/the-cheesy-sci-fi-animorphs-books-heightened-the-strang-1798267111)
> argues that the whole thing was a metaphor for puberty. [Meghan Ball
> of
> Tor](https://www.tor.com/2018/05/09/why-the-animorphs-are-overdue-for-a-revival/)
> and [Lindsey Weedston of The Mary
> Sue](https://www.themarysue.com/5-ways-animorphs-shaped-my-life/) play
> up its feminist message. Tres Dean of Geek.com claims that Applegate
> was a \"prophet\" whose books anticipated 9/11 and the Iraq War. Many
> fans, including me, find a compelling transgender narrative in the
> character of Tobias, who chooses to remain in the body of a red-tailed
> hawk forever rather than continue living as a boy. In drafting this
> essay, I briefly considered making the argument that the series was
> really about the experience of being a child inappropriately entrusted
> with an adult secret.*
>
> *None of these readings are wrong. But none of them feel exactly right
> to me, either---not as an explanation of what made the books great. I
> don\'t think we loved them for their allegorical resonance. We loved
> them because they were exactly what they appeared to be: a series
> about five teenagers morphing into animals to fight aliens.*
