---
title: "Climate change, here and now; identity politics, everywhere and always"
date: 2019-02-09
url: /reads/0015
tags: ["climate","somaliland","politics","economics","immigration","military","abortion","race","racism","sociology","movies","academia"]
summary: "Prosecutors argued this week that members of the borderland faith-based organization No More Deaths broke the law by leaving jugs of water and cans of beans for migrants trekking through a remote wilderness refuge in the Sonoran Desert... The most serious charges have been leveled against Scott Warren, a 36-year-old academic, whom the government charged with three felony counts of harboring and conspiracy, for providing food, water, and a place to sleep to two undocumented men over three days last January. Warren faces 20 years in prison if convicted and sentenced to consecutive terms."
author: "Matthew Alampay Davis"
showToc: true
disableAnchoredHeadings: false
---

### ["It's all about climate change. You can touch it in Somaliland---it is real, it is here."](https://www.ft.com/content/c8b475b2-ebf2-11e8-89c8-d36339d835c0)

> *A prolonged drought has killed 70 percent of the area's livestock in
> the past three years, devastating the region's pastoral economy and
> forcing tens of thousands of families to flee their grazing land for
> urban camps, according to authorities.*

> *In such circumstances, efforts to find solutions can feel futile but
> Somaliland has some ideas. The government wants to settle 2 million
> people on the coast---where fish stocks remain abundant---by 2030 and
> reduce the rural population, currently at 50 percent, by half to take
> the pressure off the land, Shire says. At the same time, the country
> will try to develop its "blue economy"---fishing, aquaculture and
> shipping---and begin a reforestation program, he adds.*
>
> *"We are a global village now---what is affecting one country is
> affecting every country and, if the impact of climate change in the
> less developed countries is not addressed, then we will all be in a
> big, big mess. There will be more displacement, there will be huge
> migration, and there will seriously be more insecurity."*

-   Related: With the government shutdown over, NOAA and NASA finally
    affirm [2018 was the fourth-warmest year in recorded
    history](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/02/06/climate/fourth-hottest-year.html?fbclid=IwAR2WlHOw9xT828oRV3Vue0WO4yB4GA4Xl-E6OMqbd82siQ9ckobHtlz3yWc):
    *"The five warmest years in recorded history have been the last
    five\... 18 of the 19 warmest years have occurred since 2001"*

-   Related: [An overview of American climate policy in the last 30
    years](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/29/opinion/climate-change-global-warming-history.html?smid=fb-nytopinion&smtyp=cur&fbclid=IwAR26kH2T-3t4IVi3uF6VZsXiNWe3sxZS3eBrwuv5HFyPeA6BE931c-DlDKg).
    See also this montage of the last [12 years of the United States
    stalling on climate
    change](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yzDjjUAt3zc) (embedded
    below). Climate change did not come up in the recent State of the
    Union or in the 2012 or 2016 presidential and vice-presidential
    debates, but looks to be a principal part of the 2020 Democratic
    primary. I don't know much about the Green New Deal proposal at the
    moment other than that on its face,
    [this](https://twitter.com/Noahpinion/status/1094106732723200000)
    seems to be an irresponsible way to evaluate it.

-   Related: [*The New Yorker* on the false choice between economic
    growth and climate
    policy](https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/the-false-choice-between-economic-growth-and-combatting-climate-change?fbclid=IwAR34oiy9O5lz4_fhRa4swtXIp4Qesd6wkooQNKLdQQGMnHhV2j6wQY2w1e0),
    quoting my Stanford supervisor and discussing our paper from last
    year demonstrating substantial economic benefits from climate change
    mitigation.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/yzDjjUAt3zc?si=-R8xUvvpYl_oVhWl" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### [Climate change and border militarization](https://www.thenation.com/article/the-climate-wall-qa-with-todd-miller/)

An interview of Todd Miller whose book *Storming the Wall* was mentioned
[in my last post](/reads/0014).

> *All of the assessments about climate change---whether coming from the
> United Nations, the private sector, the Department of Defense, or the
> Department of Homeland Security---are talking about accelerating
> migration, displacement of people, and how it will "challenge
> stability." Already, 22.5 million people are already being displaced
> per year, according to the [Internal Displacement Monitoring
> Center](http://www.internal-displacement.org/), with projections
> ranging between 150 million and one billion by 2050. There's a lot of
> talk about risk, and that slips easily into talk about "terrorism,"
> they talk about conflict, and so on. A significant part of today's
> border militarization exists in a context where it isn't about today
> or the immediate present, but rather anticipating future events that
> could happen. DHS and others are planning 30 years into the
> future---for what they believe will happen---and climate is definitely
> on their minds.*

Mentioned in the link is that [the legality of helping migrants stay
alive](https://theintercept.com/2019/01/17/no-more-deaths-border-documents-trial/)
is on trial:

> *Trump administration prosecutors argued this week that members of the
> borderland faith-based organization No More Deaths broke the law by
> leaving jugs of water and cans of beans for migrants trekking through
> a remote wilderness refuge in the Sonoran Desert. The arguments came
> in the first of a series of high-profile federal trials in Tucson,
> Arizona, where humanitarian aid volunteers are facing prosecution
> under a litany of charges.*
>
> *Assistant U.S. Attorney Anna Wright, who is currently spearheading
> multiple cases against members of the humanitarian group, assured
> Magistrate Judge Bernardo P. Velasco that the evidence would clearly
> show that on the afternoon of August 13, 2017, four No More Deaths
> volunteers... broke the law when they drove onto the Cabeza Prieta
> National Wildlife Refuge, just outside the tiny town of Ajo, Arizona,
> and left humanitarian aid supplies for migrants passing through the
> region.*
>
> *The most serious charges have been leveled against Scott Warren, a
> 36-year-old academic, whom the government charged with three felony
> counts of harboring and conspiracy, for providing food, water, and a
> place to sleep to two undocumented men over three days last January.
> Warren faces 20 years in prison if convicted and sentenced to
> consecutive terms.*

The land manager of the Arizona refuge where more than 70 "sets of human
remains" were found between 2015 and 2017:

> *"Even worse," he said in the email. "They are now putting our [sic]
> protein shakes and canned foods. This is beyond saving lives, as the
> added food can help energize folks to hike another day or two, thus
> continue their journey."*

### Identity politics

The Friday before her response to President Trump's State of the Union
address, Stacey Abrams published a response to Francis Fukuyama's
criticism of identity politics. In Fukuyama's words:

> *What we call identity politics grew out of the social movements of
> the 1960s, around the demands of African Americans, women, gays and
> lesbians and other marginalized groups for recognition of their
> dignity and concrete remedies to social disadvantages. These demands
> have evolved over the years to displace socio-economic class as the
> traditional way that much of the left thinks about inequality. They
> reflect important grievances but in some cases, began to take on an
> exclusive character where people's "lived experiences" determined who
> they were. This created obstacles to empathy and communication. ---*
> (Source:
> [WaPo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/theworldpost/wp/2018/09/18/identity-politics/?utm_term=.317930d61ef7))

> *The reason I wrote this book on identity was that you've now seen the
> rise of a right-wing identity politics. If you want to know what that
> means, just look at the behavior of Donald Trump before the Nov. 6
> midterm election. He was advised to campaign on his tax cuts and the
> fact that the economy was doing great. And instead, all we heard about
> was this horrible migrant caravan and taking away birthright
> citizenship and sending the military to the border to protect us from
> these terrorists trying to get into the country. I mean that's really
> an example of what we mean by identity politics are shifting the
> conversation away from economic policy to these identity issues, where
> essentially your identity is fixed by your birth --- by the ethnicity
> and the religion and the characteristics of your parents. And I just
> think it's very hard to have a democracy under those conditions. It
> feeds the polarization in the country, which I think is our single
> biggest vulnerability right now.* (Source:
> [PRI](https://www.pri.org/stories/2019-01-01/francis-fukuyama-2018-year-identity-politics))

[Abrams'
response](https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2019-02-01/stacey-abrams-response-to-francis-fukuyama-identity-politics-article?fbclid=IwAR15f1HUTu8uS4aIl0Ddrh8WSQz49oSA63E9PSKbA6MNFwTnPdHD4PcJ4bk):

> *The facile advice to focus solely on class ignores these complex
> links among American notions of race, gender, and economics. As
> Fukuyama himself notes, it has been difficult "to create broad
> coalitions to fight for redistribution," since "members of the working
> class who also belong to higher-status identity groups (such as whites
> in the United States) tend to resist making common cause with those
> below them, and vice versa." Fukuyama's preferred strategy is also
> called into question by the success that the Democratic Party enjoyed
> in 2018 by engaging in what he derides as identity politics. Last
> year, I was the Democratic Party's gubernatorial nominee in Georgia
> and became the first African American woman in U.S. history to be
> nominated for governor by a major political party. In my bid for
> office, I intentionally and vigorously highlighted communities of
> color and other marginalized groups, not to the exclusion of others
> but as a recognition of their specific policy needs.*
>
> *...Beyond electoral politics, Fukuyama and others argue that by
> calling out ethnic, cultural, gender, or sexual differences,
> marginalized groups harm themselves and their causes. By enumerating
> and celebrating distinctions, the argument goes, they give their
> opponents reasons for further excluding them. But minorities and the
> marginalized have little choice but to fight against the particular
> methods of discrimination employed against them. The marginalized did
> not create identity politics: their identities have been forced on
> them by dominant groups, and politics is the most effective method of
> revolt.*

[*The New York Review* also published a
response](https://www.nybooks.com/daily/2019/02/07/americas-original-identity-politics/?fbclid=IwAR12_T5mIl9YqIRjuwIz72l_UzqsWZIDD7ewISOZnmbfSVGS5gaeSHKA_UQ)
to Fukuyama and Mark Lilla, the Columbia professor whose op-ed titled
["The End of Identity
Liberalism"](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/opinion/sunday/the-end-of-identity-liberalism.html)
was the *New York Times*' most-read political op-ed of the election year
2016:

> *There are no pre-identity politics, just as there are no pre-identity
> economics, in a country in which political, economic, and legal rights
> were only ever granted to some identity groups and not to others. The
> only thing new about "the omnipresent rhetoric of identity" is the
> voices that have been added to it, reshaping it in ways that alarm and
> affront those who used to be its sole authors. But it was always
> omnipresent.*
>
> *Virtually every major event in the long and troubled history of the
> United States was a direct consequence of identity politics. Start
> whenever you think America begins, and power struggles based on
> identity will be staring you in the face, starting with the genocide
> and forced resettlement of indigenous peoples by European migrants...
> That's identity politics.*
>
> *Black people were enslaved, white people were free: it takes a
> colossal set of blinders to keep from seeing that as identity
> politics. Political judgments and legal decisions based on identity
> underwrote white supremacy from the start: measuring African Americans
> as three-fifths of a human is identity politics, a logic that led to
> the one-drop rule, the Dred Scott decision, Jim Crow segregation, and
> the Birther movement... Electoral colleges were established in order
> to solve the "problem of the Negroes," as James Madison put it,
> rigging the number of electors a state received in order to put a
> white supremacist thumb on the constitutional scale. Insofar as
> identity politics helped elect Donald Trump, electoral colleges seem a
> more proximate cause than debates over gender-neutral bathrooms.*
>
> *That* The Economist *did not even notice that its checklist of
> identity politics skipped gender altogether is both ironic and
> typical. In 1776, Abigail Adams famously pleaded with her husband to
> "Remember the Ladies" in drafting the nation's new code of laws...
> John Adams replied by telling her thanks, but he preferred male
> privilege: "We know better than to repeal our masculine systems."*

### [How undermining abortion rights became such a defining stance for the white evangelical right](https://www.bostonglobe.com/opinion/2018/02/05/race-not-abortion-was-founding-issue-religious-right/A5rnmClvuAU7EaThaNLAnK/story.html)

When Governor Ronald Reagan signed *"one of the most liberal abortion
laws in the country"* in 1967, evangelicals were largely supportive or
indifferent to legalization. The year before *Roe v. Wade,* 68% of
Republicans [*"believed abortion to be a private matter between a woman
and her doctor. The government, they said, should not be
involved."*](https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2018/11/08/how-republicans-became-anti-choice/)

> *In fact, it wasn't until 1979---a full six years after Roe---that
> evangelical leaders, at the behest of conservative activist Paul
> Weyrich, seized on abortion not for moral reasons, but as a
> rallying-cry to deny President Jimmy Carter a second term. Why?
> Because the anti-abortion crusade was more palatable than the
> religious right's real motive: protecting segregated schools.*

American access to abortion services has [as
expected](https://www.politico.com/story/2018/01/22/trump-religious-activists-hhs-351735)
been targeted by the Trump administration and (unlike climate change)
[did feature in the State of the Union
address](https://www.nbcnews.com/think/opinion/trump-s-state-union-comments-abortion-reveal-relentless-hypocrisy-anti-ncna969546):

> *The ongoing assault on Americans' constitutional right to access
> abortion care is nothing new, though efforts to curtail that right
> have taken on a different sense of urgency since President Donald
> Trump became president. In 2017, 19 states passed 63 legal
> restrictions on abortion access, the largest number of anti-abortion
> laws enacted since 2013, according to the Guttmacher Institute. During
> the 2016 presidential election, then-candidate Trump promised to
> appoint Supreme Court judges who would overturn Roe v. Wade; a promise
> he has certainly kept.*
>
> *Indeed, just recently, in the State of the Union address, the
> president regurgitated outright lies about abortions that occur later
> in pregnancy, evoking the image of a mother holding a newborn in an
> attempt to demonize not only the act of abortion but the people who
> have them. "There could be no greater contrast to the beautiful image
> of a mother holding her infant child than the chilling displays our
> nation saw in recent days," he said, before intentionally
> misrepresenting New York state's newly passed law that codifies Roe v.
> Wade and allows abortion past 24 weeks gestation in the case of severe
> fetal abnormality or a threat to the patient's life, as well as
> Virginia Governor Ralph Northam's recent comments about end-of-life
> infant care.*

-   Related: Speaking of Northam, [why blackface just won't go
    away](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/07/arts/blackface-american-pop-culture.html?smid=fb-nytimes&smtyp=cur&fbclid=IwAR0M2V_P4VH_xa1_vfh9mCTKX8sULi1NvRkpO4c34mgagivXYo9xMI4YRZw)

### [An open letter from Philadelphia high school students to sociologist Alice Goffman](http://www.publicseminar.org/2018/05/an-open-letter-to-alice-goffman/?fbclid=IwAR3AgBtDnC9WalCTC4EQAdyi8KP13-K35A_7dP5uHcx2jmkQRGG8OJINT-Y) (h/t Claire)

From May of last year. [2016 NYT article for
context](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/17/magazine/the-trials-of-alice-goffman.html?fbclid=IwAR0_HOJ2xiLvP55rESllhogwq6SPjhhWzbnZGp473TOIUautg-qOPaEyq_Q).

> On the Run *purports to provide an ethnographic "account of the prison
> boom and its more hidden practices of policing and surveillance as
> young people living in one relatively poor Black neighborhood in
> Philadelphia experience and understand them."*

> *We identify your published, widely lauded, easily obtainable book as
> dangerous, Prof. Goffman, because it divulges tactics that the
> subjects of your inquiry intentionally coded for surviving life under
> siege... And it does so in a manner that erases the pervasive
> structures of white supremacy and racial colonial capitalism that
> created the material conditions described above in the first place.
> You position your "findings" as "new," largely ignoring decades-worth
> of Black scholarship that has taken up "fugitivity," carceral logics,
> and militarized surveillance.*
>
> *We wonder, who did you understand your intended audience to be, Prof.
> Goffman? It could not have been people from West Philadelphia. Not
> Mike, not Chuck, nor any of the other young men, women, and children
> from "6th Street" whom you wrote about but with whom you admittedly
> maintain minimal contact. Your book could not have aimed to benefit
> materially Black communities in Philadelphia, or similar ones
> throughout the larger country.*
>
> *Did you write On the Run for people like yourself? For white
> researchers, scholars, and educators, to provide them a voyeuristic
> view into realities they never otherwise see? Did you ever consider
> that people such as these historically have (and continue to) ignore
> and perpetrate the very same violence against Black communities which
> you claim to bring to light?*
