---
title: "'The Uninhabitable Earth' by David Wallace-Wells and the moral imperative of alarmism"
date: 2019-03-05
url: /reads/0017
tags: ["climate","literature","art","science","science fiction","academia","politics","race","social movements"]
summary: "I want you to understand how overwhelming, how insurmountable it must have felt [in the Jim Crow South]. I want you to understand that there was no end in sight. It felt futile for them too. Then, as now, there were calls to slow down. To settle for incremental remedies for an untenable situation. They, too, trembled for every baby born into that world. You don‚Äôt fight something like that because you think you will win. You fight it because you have to. Because surrendering dooms so much more than yourself, but everything that comes after you. Acquiescence, in this case, is what James Baldwin called 'the sickness unto death.' What, now, do you have to lose? What else can you be but brave?"
author: "Matthew Alampay Davis"
showToc: true
disableAnchoredHeadings: false
---

### **"The Uninhabitable Earth: Life After Warming", David Wallace-Wells**

I'm not sure the title claim is advanced in the book or supported by the
climate literature so some people may justifiably feel deceived (and
maybe also by the cover; when the mass bee deaths feature, its
connection to climate is dismissed). As far as I understand, certain
parts of the world---small island nations and some vulnerable coastal
cities---are on track to be submerged pending political intervention and
others in [South
Asia](http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/6/e1700066) and [the
Middle East](https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate2833) will
regularly have weather exceeding the limits of human survivability. But
that's just [30% of the world's population for 20 days a year currently
and maybe 48-74% of the population by
2100](https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate3322) depending on what we
do. By then, that study estimates, many equatorial locations like
Jakarta, Indonesia are expected to experience [deadly heat 365 days a
year](https://twitter.com/wmdecon/status/1085223144628072448). Luckily,
[the city will probably be completely below sea
level](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/12/21/world/asia/jakarta-sinking-climate.html)
anyway. So literally the entire Earth uninhabitable? Doesn't seem
likely. 'Just' conducive to heat death on a daily basis for hundreds of
millions thousands of miles away from political influence and the land
inhabited by 5% of the world's population will experience chronic
submergence. And then the next century will start.

To be less flippant, the title serves mostly to make explicit the book's
origin as the author's [2017
long-form](http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2017/07/climate-change-earth-too-hot-for-humans.html)
([here](http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2017/07/climate-change-earth-too-hot-for-humans-annotated.html?gtm=top&fbclid=IwAR3zd2LGedd98pNtyQY6qvcilmx5EuNxAXW1nBK9cecN9JE3miiWC_XaK0I)'s
a version annotated by scientists), which quickly became *New York*
magazine's most read article ever (though it's since been unseated by a
"Fire and Fury" excerpt). Many called the original article's focus on
and presentation of worst-case scenarios sensationalist, maybe most
prominent among them the climatologist and climate science communicator
Prof. Michael Mann. [In Mann's
words](https://www.facebook.com/MichaelMannScientist/posts/2165027950220062?__xts__%5B0%5D=68.ARBurqE83qdFHYzg3LRj4-kqfoOHZVBvj8kI1BviFdMVV9XbyTGMEU6dF40P3biw5noUQEHTeLCjSZG-phT5m87eVoG_j6uyn_WSswMiY9DDFopBo7N8tuxQ7HkY1C-olwcKFgE_65teL2rrY06zzUxQy8bZ4BAWDjnI_16DHSTQVblunnF097Ao8AzN3nacUh91eus78uRnVZd_cmDy-s0ntV2UO9jBf6RSl350f025xvACuk0rwaydOKX3Wk_EOTSQBLQgffe1OJkqQfQaEVVv8v8Iro98hP9IIbaJOatHK8ZTqOuFsdWwlqNKJ5gtymATBp80Mc6sm_B3rICxV_lamw&__tn__=-R),
his problem with the article was *"the fact that there were SCIENTIFIC
INACCURACIES that PREFERENTIALLY fed a somewhat doomist narrative."* In
contrast, with this book adaptation, *"David has done his due diligence,
vetted the science, and gotten it right."* Since the publication of the
original article, Mann and Wallace-Wells have participated in a [public
conversation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VfZbYcLxQBI) hosted by NYU
to discuss the communication of climate science and have [jointly
promoted the
book](https://www.msnbc.com/morning-joe/watch/-we-are-entering-into-an-unprecedented-climate-1445411907673).

To me, the book is overwhelmingly a success and potentially an important
leap forward in advancing how the public understands the enormity of the
climate change problem. By 'public', I also mean to include [academics
from other
disciplines](https://www.wmadavis.com/links/2019/2/16/economists-statement)
and the [op-ed
intelligentsia](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-02-12/an-alternative-to-alexandria-ocasio-cortez-s-green-new-deal)
who've decided to stake a claim of expertise in the area now that the
Green New Deal proposal has made the topic politically relevant.

Part of this contribution may be its updating the language of climate
change. "97% consensus" and [the questions of its happening and of human
attribution are old](http://ceep.columbia.edu/papers/n2.pdf). Here's
some new:

-   [250,000 additional deaths attributable to climate change every
    year,
    conservatively](https://edition.cnn.com/2019/01/16/health/climate-change-health-emergency-study/index.html)

-   [200,000,000](https://reliefweb.int/report/world/climate-migrants-might-reach-one-billion-2050)
    as a median estimate for the number of (mostly intranational)
    migrants seeking refuge from climate by 2050. I'm being
    intentionally wordy because a ["climate refugee" isn't officially a
    thing
    yet](https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2018/03/06/why-climate-migrants-do-not-have-refugee-status).
    [70%](https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2018/03/19/climate-change-could-force-over-140-million-to-migrate-within-countries-by-2050-world-bank-report)
    of these will be from sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and South
    Asia.

-   [Climate change as
    "genocide,"](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2015/10/05/climate-change-migration-is-genocide-says-marshall-islands-minister/)
    as the foreign minister of the Marshall Islands put it

-   The ["catastrophic
    convergence"](https://socialtextjournal.org/tropic_of_chaos_christian_parenti_interviewed/),
    the term introduced by journalist Christian Parenti in 2011 to
    describe the intersection of imperialism, neoliberalism, and climate
    change

-   Environmental justice as a ["climate caste
    system"](https://grist.org/article/the-uninhabitable-earth-puts-words-to-a-future-you-dont-want-to-live-in/),
    a Wallace-Wells coinage

-   [Climate
    reparations](http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/climate-change-reparations-what-does-the-us-owe-1)

The main criticism I've seen levied against the book and similar ones
has been that they are alarmist. While sometimes an appropriate epithet
used to throw cold water on inappropriately extreme messaging (see the
cloud study mentioned at the bottom of this post), it's also had the
effect of dismissing necessary attempts to bring the public up to speed
with our current understanding of the consequences of climate change,
which has advanced significantly in recent years. Wallace-Wells' work
embraces the adjective: his [recent NYT opinion
piece](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/16/opinion/sunday/fear-panic-climate-change-warming.html)
adapted from the book uses the headline "Time to Panic." The book's
first sentence, the same as the original article's, is *"It is worse,
much worse, than you think."* And on page 138: *"If you have made it
this far, you are a brave reader."*

This gets to the heart of an outstanding issue with public engagement on
the impacts of climate change. Any honest reading of [the growing
interdisciplinary
literature](http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6304/aad9837/tab-e-letters)
on climate impacts should induce panic, a natural expression of empathy
for the most vulnerable human beings on our planet. From my perspective,
to admonish those who feel fear amounts to promotion of injustice and
ignorance. Two climate journalists discuss that
[here](https://grist.org/article/to-fear-or-not-to-fear-a-conversation-between-david-wallace-wells-and-eric-holthaus/).

Noah Smith recently had what I think is a [lazy take on the dangers of
climate
panic](https://twitter.com/Noahpinion/status/1100442853770027008) when
comparing being upset by the prospects of climate impacts to the fear to
itself be feared during the Great Depression:

\<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"\>\<p lang="en" dir="ltr"\>I think
there's something to this. FDR didn't sell the New Deal by screaming
about the dangers of total economic collapse. Climate change IS very
scary, but we can't afford to panic, because when we panic we tend to do
silly, counterproductive things. \<a
href="[https://t.co/GUybhptrha"\\](https://t.co/GUybhptrha%22\){.uri}\>[https://t.co/GUybhptrha\\](https://t.co/GUybhptrha\){.uri}\</a\>\</p\>---
Noah Smith üêáüá∫üá∏üá∫üá¶ (\@Noahpinion) \<a
href="[https://twitter.com/Noahpinion/status/1100442853770027008?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw"\\](https://twitter.com/Noahpinion/status/1100442853770027008?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%22\){.uri}\>February
26, 2019\</a\>\</blockquote\> \<script async
src="<https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js>"
charset="utf-8"\>\</script\>

To hone in on the Great Depression analogy, there is no meaningful
parallel between the mass panic of bank runs collapsing the
international economy to the supposed chaos that would ensue from
learning what climate change does. [When has high public concern ever
led to commensurate or over-compensating
policy](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/05/opinion/oppression-majority.html)?
As pointed out
[here](https://twitter.com/wlawren90/status/1100458121187729408), the
metaphorical mapping would not have the concerned public playing the FDR
role; it would be more like everyone but FDR noticing the stock market
crashing and then pressuring the bumbling President to take action at an
appropriately revolutionary scale. If made in good faith, it's
a[silly](https://twitter.com/dwallacewells/status/1100461131867611136)
if not harmful argument for Noah to half-ass for an important topic.

It also seems to be the opposite criticism to the typical one made about
alarmism, which is that it induces political defeatism and paralysis. I
realize I'm focusing on a single tweet, but Smith has over 135,000
Twitter followers and a Bloomberg column so his thinking out loud in 280
characters at a time to try to reconcile his staunch neoliberalism with
the catastrophic embodiment of its shortcomings is unfortunately
influential. A bit more on this later below.

We've lived with climate indifference for the past few decades and it
hasn't produced any meaningful policy. In contrast, [the urgency of the
young Democratic
progressives](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/alexandria-ocasio-cortez-children-climate-change-aoc-instagram-young-people-a8797806.html)
made climate change maybe the [defining issue of the 2020 Democratic
primary](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/04/us/politics/senate-democrats-climate-change.html?smid=fb-nytimes&smtyp=cur&fbclid=IwAR0U4rGyfY50M6umYFKijzbCE9IwrZkZ0S7atWE7AZGFKKQz80tYwgM9JRk)
before they were even sworn into Congress, this after [none of the US
presidential or vice-presidential debates from the last two races
included a single question about climate
change](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/19/where-is-climate-change-in-the-trump-v-clinton-presidential-debates).
To drive home the opportunities climate indifference has squandered,
consider this hypothetical that Wallace-Wells presents:

> *"If we had started global decarbonization in 2000, when Al Gore
> narrowly lost election to the American presidency, we would have had
> to cut emissions by only about 3 percent per year to stay safely under
> two degrees of warming. If we start today, when global emissions are
> still growing, the necessary rate is 10 percent. If we delay another
> decade, it will require us to cut emissions by 30 percent each year."*

The idea of fear inhibiting meaningful action is disputed in [social
movement
theory](https://twitter.com/cityatlas/status/1100461897315422214) and I
hope I am not out of line in invoking [civil rights
movements](https://medium.com/s/story/sorry-yall-but-climate-change-ain-t-the-first-existential-threat-b3c999267aa0):

> *I want you to understand how overwhelming, how insurmountable it must
> have felt [in the Jim Crow South]. I want you to understand that there
> was no end in sight. It felt futile for them too. Then, as now, there
> were calls to slow down. To settle for incremental remedies for an
> untenable situation. They, too, trembled for every baby born into that
> world.*
>
> *You don't fight something like that because you think you will win.
> You fight it because you have to. Because surrendering dooms so much
> more than yourself, but everything that comes after you. Acquiescence,
> in this case, is what James Baldwin called 'the sickness unto death.'*
>
> *What, now, do you have to lose? What else can you be but brave?*

In 2017, [150 Indians carried the skulls of their fellow
farmers](https://www.nybooks.com/daily/2018/12/14/indias-farmers-on-the-march/)---some
small subset of the 320,000 driven to suicide due to uncharacteristic
climate-driven crop damage between 1995 and 2016---and trekked to the
capital Delhi to protest naked and sitting down for almost a month to
demand a policy response: *"We wanted to symbolically shame our leaders
into action."* So the notion that the relatively wealthy and
climate-insulated can't be trusted to inform themselves about climate
change because they might accidentally do *too much* out of fear is
offensive, in my opinion. Maybe anti-alarmism is also part of [the new
climate
denialism](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/mar/01/could-climate-delayer-become-the-political-epithet-of-our-times).

It is this notion of injustice that I think resonated most while reading
this book and even while contributing the little I have to climate
research. Wallace-Wells make the point that we've now expelled more
greenhouse gases while aware of its contribution to the global
greenhouse effect than we ever did in ignorance going back to the dawn
of the industrial revolution. There is an intuitive unfairness now in
*"trying to bring many hundreds of millions more into the global middle
class while knowing that the easy paths taken by the nations that
industrialized in the nineteenth and even twentieth centuries are now
paths to climate chaos."*

![](/blog/blog-files/country-scc.png)

The legacy of colonialism, slavery, and Western exceptionalism permeate
the narrative of climate change. The figure above shows that Saudi
Arabia, India, Brazil, and Indonesia are expected to bear the largest
share of economic growth impacts relative to their contribution of
carbon emissions. For India and Brazil, this ratio is estimated to be
roughly 4:1 (but maybe [President Bolsonaro's deforestation can swing
the ratio towards
equity](https://news.mongabay.com/2018/10/fate-of-the-amazon-is-on-the-ballot-in-brazils-presidential-election-commentary/)).
The two biggest emitters---the United States and China---are net
beneficiaries by this definition, China by a less than 1:4 ratio.

There is a [normalized disregard for the well-being of those in
vulnerable
areas](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2019/feb/21/climate-change-cause-of-most-under-reported-humanitarian-crises-report-finds?fbclid=IwAR3wUlqa3XChcMPKHXrS0JLErZw6-H0cx9fDZdzkA8E3iKuCQ9j2xs-X9Lw)
already suffering tremendously from climate change even among those
prepared to embrace the science of climate. How else to interpet the
Nobel committee approving the Nordhaus recommendation that [3.5 degrees
of warming is
optimal](https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/12/06/the-nobel-prize-for-climate-catastrophe/)
the same day that the devastating IPCC Report on 1.5 warming came out?
How else to read [these
suggestions](https://twitter.com/chrislhayes/status/1101628166249111553)
(tweets embedded to the right) that the brutal reality of climate change
has finally arrived only now that it's violently affected the United
States in the last two years?\
\
The only dimension along which climate change has been *"far off"* was
in geography and political power. In 2013, even before Haiyan, [85% of
Filipinos reported personal experience with climate change impacts, 54%
of them describing them as "severe"](https://t.co/NmM57D1YH0). In 2015,
[54% of Hispanic
Americans](https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/10/us/politics/climate-change-is-of-growing-personal-concern-to-us-hispanics-poll-finds.html?module=inline)
rated global warming as "extremely or very important to them
personally". In 2017, monsoon-exacerbated floods affected [45 million in
South Asia](https://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/media_100719.html) and
submerged two thirds of Bangladesh, including parts of the makeshift
hillside camps where nearly a million Rohingya refugees have been forced
to settle [at risk of death by disease or
mudslides](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/05/30/world/asia/rohingya-monsoon-bangladesh.html).
When will developing countries or [the
vulnerable](https://www.npr.org/2019/03/05/688786177/how-federal-disaster-money-favors-the-rich?utm_source=twitter.com&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=npr&utm_term=nprnews&utm_content=20190305)
[within developed
countries](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/03/us/hurricane-harvey-houston.html)
get their say as frequently as do white [op-ed
writers](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/28/opinion/climate-of-complete-certainty.html)
or [public
intellectuals](https://montrealgazette.com/opinion/opinion-steven-pinkers-optimism-on-climate-change-is-misplaced)
who command enormous platforms on seemingly any issue of their choosing
regardless of experience or expertise? [They haven't
yet.](https://truthout.org/articles/whose-lives-matter-a-crisis-of-solidarity-at-the-climate-talks-in-paris/)
Anti-alarmism and Western exceptionalism would have you discount the
value of those lives.

Other than harrowing research findings, I think a problem in climate
communications is its failure to capture the imagination. A small
chapter in the book poses a question I've wondered myself: Where is the
great climate-change novel? Land war, nuclear winter, artificial
intelligence, and other generation-defining threats have inspired
influential works of art, but none springs immediately to mind about
climate change.

"Mad Max: Fury Road", while an action masterpiece, is only tenuously
climate-related considering its desert dystopia was conceived before
1979. "Interstellar" was all right. I had been hoping from the trailer
and its first half that ["First
Reformed"](https://youtu.be/5y0owYFTMno?t=337) could be that movie, but
I think it's third act may have veered off message and it didn't garner
the Academy's attention (not even an acting nomination for an
outstanding entry by Ethan Hawke). Maybe ["Woman At
War"](https://www.indiewire.com/2019/03/woman-at-war-review-benedikt-erlingsson-1202048224/amp/)
can be one.

Music-wise, I can only think of [ANOHNI's "4
Degrees"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fi0q0O4V5Qs) which was
released in the context of the Paris Agreement. Thom Yorke, the
vegetarian frontman of carbon-neutral [Radiohead has
said](https://www.nme.com/news/music/thom-yorke-8-1192226), *"If I was
going to write a protest song about climate change in 2015, it would be
shit."*

Wallace-Wells offers some plausible explanations for its unique
storytelling challenges, but I worry the answer may also be related to
the aforementioned inequality.

Next on the climate reading list: *Storming the Wall: Climate Change,
Migration, and Homeland Security* by Todd Miller

### Climate stuff elsewhere

#### Young people and climate justice

-   Young people and climate justice

    -   [An overview of young people and environmental
        politics](https://theconversation.com/school-climate-strikes-what-next-for-the-latest-generation-of-activists-111594?fbclid=IwAR25rnzZ4t-pR-kNXbVOsON2a1Jin5TwbWXdmdvy2tu4dymPBUoqJy3GS1Y)

    -   [Greta](https://www.newyorker.com/news/our-columnists/the-fifteen-year-old-climate-activist-who-is-demanding-a-new-kind-of-politics)
        [Thunberg](https://t.co/KmBEzwufB7); Sweden

    -   [Alexandria
        Villasenor](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/how-a-7th-graders-strike-against-climate-change-exploded-into-a-movement/2019/02/15/e20868e2-2fb4-11e9-86ab-5d02109aeb01_story.html?noredirect=on&utm_term=.f720000356c3);
        New York, USA

    -   [Theresa May disapproves of schoolchildren's climate
        strike](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-may-climate-change-school-pupils-protest-lesson-time-teachers-a8781046.html);
        UK

    -   [A letter from the
        young](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/mar/01/youth-climate-change-strikers-open-letter-to-world-leaders),
        published by the Guardian, ahead of next week's global climate
        strike

    -   [Senator Feinstein presented with a letter urging her to support
        the Green New
        Deal](https://edition.cnn.com/2019/02/22/politics/feinstein-video-sunrise-movement-kids/index.html);
        California, USA. Passing thoughts:

        -   It is probably unfair to use kids to ambush a politician at
            her place of work to advocate a specific piece of
            legislation that they don't understand

        -   Sen. Feinstein still demonstrated a surprising lack of grace
            and political savvy for a long-time public servant,
            reflecting all the worst features associated with
            caricatures of the political establishment: boastfulness
            (citing election margin of victory), appeals to authority
            ("I've been doing this for 30 years"), smugness ("I'm 16"
            "Well, you didn't vote for me"), and dangling empty
            concessions (an internship to win silence)

        -   The [full
            video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cd3H1boPIIE&feature=youtu.be)
            does not redeem Feinstein as much as people say. In fact, to
            a comical degree, it is emblematic enough of the
            generational transfer of burden that defines climate
            inaction and provides so much background exposition that it
            will doubtlessly be used in future documentary footage

-   [Federal disaster money favors the
    rich](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/03/us/hurricane-harvey-houston.html)
    (linked to above but reposting as its own item here for emphasis)

> *An NPR investigation has found that across the country, white
> Americans and those with more wealth often receive more federal
> dollars after a disaster than do minorities and those with less
> wealth. Federal aid isn't necessarily allocated to those who need it
> most; it's allocated according to cost-benefit calculations meant to
> minimize taxpayer risk.*
>
> *Put another way, after a disaster, rich people get richer and poor
> people get poorer. And federal disaster spending appears to exacerbate
> that wealth inequality.*

-   Princeton physics professor (in atomic physics and spectroscopy, not
    climate science) [William Happer is President Trump's
    pick](https://www.vox.com/2019/2/20/18233378/william-happer-trump-climate-change-panel)
    to chair a new Presidential Committee on Climate Security. In 2014,
    he said [the
    following](https://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2014/07/15/carbon-dioxide-demonization-jews_n_5589098.html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cDovL3JlZGdyZWVuYW5kYmx1ZS5vcmcvMjAxOS8wMi8yMi9oZWFkLXRydW1wcy1jbGltYXRlLWNoYW5nZS1wYW5lbC1zYXlzLWF0dGFja3MtY28yLWxpa2UtaGl0bGVycy1hdHRhY2tzLWpld3MvP2ZiY2xpZD1Jd0FSM0tYTUE0eVdQSzJ0NTBpVklsYWo2QVlDY3RBaEdPcm1hYkNBVGFjM1dLZTlpVVBwQW1JVkNPdTlJ&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAEYPwnZ43RsEJtmz8qPjIKJuw9FQ3QGYgW7UTcpK27ZcgR20pCZqpp56CUL6wrz4gk0vXQFII5TDoj12O2iWc9pdVW5mvXp41q4Z18g7iMkKGj9g1kKNGk0E77hjXuO3gqxthARyAyZcfqrl_hqWld73CtmVEx5hvOMGbycDdGga):

> *"The demonization of carbon dioxide is just like the demonization of
> the poor Jews under Hitler. Carbon dioxide is actually a benefit to
> the world, and so were the Jews."*

-   [The UK's CO2 emissions fell for the sixth consecutive
    year](https://www.carbonbrief.org/analysis-uks-co2-emissions-fell-for-record-sixth-consecutive-year-in-2018),
    the longest run of reductions since the mid-19th century.\
    \
    [Dr. Simon Evans points
    out](https://twitter.com/DrSimEvans/status/1102564345098260490) this
    was driven entirely by reduction in coal demand, which comprise 7%
    of national emissions and is approaching zero in accordance with a
    2025 timeline. Oil and gas-originated emissions have gone up.

-   Mann recently touched on[the recent
    article](https://www.quantamagazine.org/cloud-loss-could-add-8-degrees-to-global-warming-20190225/?fbclid=IwAR0XwLjZRMJzg2SGod3sl66LRea9CcgfKg3y_UPYjgCyJ3uns45tTbz2Mso)
    about the [supercomputer simulation of climate-cloud formation
    feedback loops](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41561-019-0310-1),
    which found global warming could soar by an additional eight degrees
    Celsius if a tipping point is breached. Mann cautions: *"This effect
    only POTENTIALLY kicks in for CO2 levels of 1200+ ppm, much higher
    than we should EVER allow"*
