---
title: "Mechanism design and social justice; and 'Go Tell It on the Mountain' by James Baldwin"
date: 2019-07-23
url: /reads/0021
tags: ["economics","micro theory","academia","comedy","literature","james baldwin","religion"]
summary: "This paper investigates the peculiarities that arise when mechanism design is deployed in contexts in which issues of social, racial and distributive justice are particularly salient. Economists’ involvement in redesigning Boston’s algorithm for allocating K-12 students to public schools serves as an instructive case study. The paper draws on the distinction between ideal theory and non-ideal theory in political philosophy and the concept of performativity in economic sociology to argue that mechanism can enact elaborate ideal theories of justice. A normative gap thus emerges between the goals of the policymakers and the objectives of economic designs. As a result, mechanism design may obstruct stakeholders’ avenues for normative criticism of public policies, and serve as a technology of depoliticization."
author: "Matthew Alampay Davis"
showToc: true
disableAnchoredHeadings: false
---

### [*Bridging the 'Normative Gap': Mechanism Design and Social Justice*, Zoë Hitzig](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3242882#)

Abstract:

> *This paper investigates the peculiarities that arise when mechanism
> design is deployed in contexts in which issues of social, racial and
> distributive justice are particularly salient. Economists' involvement
> in redesigning Boston's algorithm for allocating K-12 students to
> public schools serves as an instructive case study. The paper draws on
> the distinction between ideal theory and non-ideal theory in political
> philosophy and the concept of performativity in economic sociology to
> argue that mechanism can enact elaborate ideal theories of justice. A
> normative gap thus emerges between the goals of the policymakers and
> the objectives of economic designs. As a result, mechanism design may
> obstruct stakeholders' avenues for normative criticism of public
> policies, and serve as a technology of depoliticization.*

Thread from frequent co-author E. Glen Weyl
[here](https://twitter.com/glenweyl/status/1145771680092033024) and
embedded below:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I am blown away by the brilliant, award-winning paper by <a href="https://twitter.com/zhitzig?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@zhitzig</a> available here: <a href="https://t.co/T5tEiAJUKP">https://t.co/T5tEiAJUKP</a>. Everyone in market design needs to read it, as it absolutely nails what is so absurd about the whole Roth-style approach to matching market design.</p>&mdash; (((E. Glen Weyl))) stands with 🇺🇦 and 🇹🇼 (@glenweyl) <a href="https://twitter.com/glenweyl/status/1145771680092033024?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">July 1, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

This paper follows in the footsteps of [Alexandrova
(2008)](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258179648_Connecting_Economic_Models_to_the_Real_World_Game_Theory_and_the_FCC_Spectrum_Auctions)
in critiquing the design of real-life markets using microeconomic
theory. Whereas Alexandrova focused on game theory and the celebrated
FCC spectrum auctions, Hitzig focuses on Roth-style matching theory and
the allocation of applicants to Boston Public Schools (BPS), a canonical
case study in the literature.

The titular "normative gap" refers to the inexactness with which the
mechanism designed by the consulting economists actually applies their
favored theory of justice, which Hitzig identifies as [Arneson's 'equal
opportunity for welfare'
principle](https://www.jstor.org/stable/4320032?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents),
a more complex normative framework than the notion of simple efficiency
on which microeconomic theory usually hangs its hat. More precisely,
Hitzig argues that the deferred acceptance algorithm ultimately advanced
by the consultants could not be described as an *application* of a
particular matching theory, but rather as the imposition of an idealized
setting that coerces real people to role-play as the highly idealized
agents the setting demands by assumption. Hitzig describes this as an
*enactment* (as opposed to an *application*) arising from two idealizing
assumptions: strict compliance (e.g. applicants are forced to disclose
strict preferences they may not have) and favorable circumstances (e.g.
applicants are forced to communicate complete preferences even if they
do not have equal access to information on all schools). The language of
coercion I use here derives from the implied consequence of
non-participation being total exclusion from the BPS, the severity of
which is dependent on the properties of the society external to the
idealized setting. For the post-*Brown v. Board of Education* America in
which the BPS mechanism was re-designed, this of course entailed a
substantial degree of public hostility and systemic racism, an
environment recently revisited on a national platform when the legacy of
busing policy arose in the Democratic primary debates. Further, those
excluded from the idealized system are typically also excluded from the
market's welfare calculus.

Hitzig argues that such coerced enactment gives rise to "pernicious"
outcomes in some circumstances: "*when ideal theory is enacted as in the
BPS case, it might facilitate the evasion of a proper discussion of the
real injustice particular to a given situation*", in this case that of
racial inequality and "domination." I am readily sympathetic to this
perspective, but feel this argument would greatly benefit from more
directly linking the normative gap to the mechanism's failing
marginalized groups. To me, marginalization does not clearly follow from
the imprecision of stated preferences, for example. The Weyl thread
linked to above infers severe implications, suggesting the argument
conveys that Roth-style matching theory

> *[hides the flaws of the underlying logic of capitalism] behind a
> pretense of satisfying abstract properties in an extremely narrow
> setting while neglecting e.g. that some participants are desperately
> poor and abused and that their outside option is jail while others can
> go to prep school"*

and that it

> *[uses] formalism to kill off such contentious debates about
> neoliberalism...destroying in a haze of technical purity our ability
> to honestly debate the way capitalism and resulting monopolies are
> ravaging our society*

Perhaps owing to my need to have things spelled out, this didn't neatly
follow from my reading of the paper (or at least the most recent draft I
have access to) since it makes no reference to specific real-life
implications of the normative gap other than vaguely as a distraction
from addressing systemic social problems. The paper at is at multiple
points purposefully framed away from a rejection of the redesigned BPS
mechanism either in theory and practice. There are references to the
shortcomings of matching theory's underlying dependence on rational
choice and opportunities for behavioral economics to act as a cautionary
force on these technocratic prescriptions in order to accomplish the
titular 'bridging', but I'm not clear on what that could entail.

Nonetheless, it was a refreshing critical complement to my recent
matching-markets module. The list of things people have argued would
improve traditional PhD economics training is ever-growing and includes
instruction on the history of economic thought, the demotion of
macroeconomics from a core course to a field course, and guidance on the
actual practice of research. [Integration of critical perspectives such
as these](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.27.4.121) is
another.

Graduate economics students will be familiar with the correspondence of
different market designs to different theories of justice. A welfare
module might entail comparing the graphical and algebraic
representations of utilitarian, Rawlsian, and dictatorial social welfare
functionals. Any treatment of matching markets will formalize the
tradeoffs among the properties of Pareto efficiency, strategy-proofness,
and stability (and all sub-variants thereof). But my feeling is that we
are maybe susceptible to the appeal of "mechanical objectivity" that
Hitzig argues is inherent to mechanism design beyond just the familiar
inadequacies of Pareto.

### ["*How are you going to satirize this guy who is using laughter to set the world on fire?*"](https://www.npr.org/2018/12/27/680356663/director-bo-burnham-on-growing-up-with-anxiety-and-an-audience)

Hardly original to to see Donald Trump's comedic immunity as also
applicable to Boris Johnson. Still, I'm thinking of Bo Burnham's take
Donald Trump's [comedic
immunity](https://www.npr.org/2018/12/27/680356663/director-bo-burnham-on-growing-up-with-anxiety-and-an-audience)
as also applicable to Boris Johnson:

> *I personally felt like Trump is a product of comedy as much as
> anything. I mean, when I watched him in those primaries, like, I could
> see the tactics that he used from the Comedy Central roast that he was
> a part of. I can absolutely see he used the tactics of comedic timing
> and ribbing and all of that. And when I watched the primaries and
> watched him dismiss everybody and watched him make fun of everybody,
> I'm like he is winning this in the way a comedian wins a room.*
>
> *It was so funny to then watch the comedy community scramble around
> and act like we are the one thing that can take him down when it's,
> like, are you kidding me? Like, this is the exact thing that's being
> used for him. How are you going to make fun of this guy? How are you
> going to satirize this guy who is using, you know, laughter to set the
> world on fire?*

[A European
official](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/06/24/the-empty-promise-of-boris-johnson)
on Johnson:

> *We answer his attacks, but the problem is that our answers are not
> funny.*

### *Go Tell It On The Mountain*, James Baldwin (h/t Junho and Sam)

Relatable depiction of a young protagonist's guilt and shame attempting
to reconcile the Christian doctrine with the process of coming of age.
The novel's shifting perspectives through generations of a family
immediately recalled *East of Eden*, one of my all-time favorite books.
The comparison carries through to its enigmatic ending. Was curious but
couldn't find anything online on how the timing of the novel's writing
tracks the evolution of Baldwin's own personal relationship with his
faith.
